.\" Cognitify man page
.\" (C) 2024 Ramon Brooker <rbrooker@aeo3.io>
.TH COGNITIFY 1 "December 2024" "Cognitify" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cognitify \- Linux shell customizations and helper functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cognitify
[\fIhelper-function\fR] [\fIarguments\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Cognitify is a collection of Linux shell customizations, helper functions, and utility scripts designed to enhance productivity and system management across different Linux distributions.
.PP
This man page provides a quick reference to all available helper functions. For detailed documentation, see the documentation in \fI/usr/share/doc/cognitify/\fR or online at the project repository.
.SH HELPER FUNCTIONS
.SS System Information
.TP
.B ddistro [index]
Detect Linux distribution information.
.br
Index: 0=distro, 1=version, 2=family, 3=package manager (default)
.TP
.B group-check <group>
Check if current user is in specified group.
.TP
.B app-is-there <app>
Check if application exists in PATH.
.TP
.B app-values <app>
Get application availability status (0=present, 1=absent).
.SS File Management
.TP
.B stub-script <name>
Create shell script template with executable permissions.
.TP
.B note-addition "text"
Append timestamped note to file.
.TP
.B search-files [OPTIONS]
Search files with filters and optional command execution.
.br
Options: -d dir, -t type, -p prefix, -s suffix, -e command, -r recursive
.TP
.B list-empty-dirs
List all empty directories in current tree.
.TP
.B del-empty-dirs
Delete all empty directories in current tree.
.SS Container Management
.TP
.B docker-list-types <pattern>
List Docker images matching pattern.
.TP
.B docker-cleanup-old-builds
Remove Docker dangling images.
.TP
.B docker-cleanup-containers
Remove exited Docker containers.
.TP
.B shell-into-docker <container>
Enter Docker container with bash shell.
.TP
.B podman-cleanup-old-builds
Remove Podman dangling images.
.TP
.B podman-cleanup-containers
Remove exited Podman containers.
.TP
.B pod-shell-into <container>
Enter Podman container with bash shell.
.SS Development
.TP
.B setpyenv <name> [dir]
Create Python 3.12 virtual environment.
.br
Default directory: venv
.SS System Administration
.TP
.B update-hostname <hostname> <domain>
Update system hostname and domain (requires sudo).
.TP
.B get-system-ips
Display all system IP addresses.
.TP
.B add-environment-tag <label> <value>
Add system environment variable (requires sudo).
.TP
.B user-exists <username>
Check if user exists on system.
.SS Network
.TP
.B find-latency <address> [address2] ...
Measure network latency to addresses.
.SH UTILITY SCRIPTS
The following scripts are installed to \fI/usr/local/bin\fR:
.TP
.B check-chars
Character counter for text, files, and stanzas.
.TP
.B create-repo.sh
Scaffold new repository structure.
.TP
.B dirsync
Robust rsync wrapper for file transfers.
.TP
.B mkfolders
Create directories from file list.
.TP
.B opera-custom
Create Opera browser profile shortcuts.
.TP
.B stub-git-repo.sh
Create git repository with scaffolding.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Detect distribution:
.RS
.B $ ddistro
.br
apt-get
.RE
.PP
Check if user is in sudo group:
.RS
.B $ group-check sudo
.br
true
.RE
.PP
Create Python virtual environment:
.RS
.B $ setpyenv myproject
.br
setup python env
.RE
.PP
Clean up Docker:
.RS
.B $ docker-cleanup-old-builds
.br
.B $ docker-cleanup-containers
.RE
.PP
Search for configuration files:
.RS
.B $ search-files -d /etc -t conf -r
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/bash.bashrc.d/
System-wide bash configuration files
.TP
.I /etc/bash_completion.d/
Shell completion files
.TP
.I ~/.bashrc
User bash configuration (includes Cognitify)
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/
Utility scripts
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR docker (1),
.BR podman (1),
.BR python3 (1)
.PP
Full documentation: \fI/usr/share/doc/cognitify/\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Ramon Brooker <rbrooker@aeo3.io>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 Ramon Brooker
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

